
                                  proscene

	      	            Version 0.8.0 April, 2010


  Copyright (C) 2010 Jean Pierre Charalambos. All rights reserved.
  http://code.google.com/p/proscene/
  Send e-mail to: jpcharalambosh@unal.edu.co or nakednous@gmail.com

Proscene (pronounced similar as the Czech word "pros√≠m" which means "please") is a java
library which provides classes to ease the creation of interactive 3D scenes in Processing. 

Proscene has been pretty much inspired in the Qt's OpenGL C++ libqglviewer library
(http://www.libqglviewer.com/). Proscene has a very similar functionality and API
reference to that found in libqglviewer, both of which have been ported to Java.
Most of the examples found in the current release (v-0.8.0) are implementations of the
libqglviewer counterparts.

Proscene provides seemless integration with Processing: Its API has been designed to fit
that of Processing and its implementation has been optimized to work along side with it.
One of Proscene main implementation goals was to keep it independent of the underlying
Processing 3D renderer. It has been tested with the OPENGL, P3D and GLGRAPHICS renderers
and can properly work with any of them.
 
Many thanks to Gilles Debunne for releasing his fantastic libqglviewer as free software.
Many thanks to Andres Colubri (http://codeanticode.wordpress.com) for redistributing
previous releases of Proscene (such as v-0.7.0) along side his fantastic GLGraphics 
Processing library (http://users.design.ucla.edu/~acolubri/processing/glgraphics/home/).
Proscene actually started as a GLGraphics component and thanks to Andres contributions it
became a stand-alone library (you may read the whole story here: 
http://codeanticode.wordpress.com/2010/03/04/glgraphics-0-9-3-3/).

CHANGELOG

  * Version 0.8.0
    + Adding keyFrames' functionality through KeyFrameInterpolator class.
    + New examples: Luxo, PointUnderPixel and ScreenDrawing.
 
DOWNLOAD

Released packages are available at the project's page: http://code.google.com/p/proscene/

INSTALLATION

The installation of the library is quite straightforward. Just unzip the
proscene-x.y.z.zip file inside your Processing's libraries folder.

LICENSE

Proscene is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of
the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
 
A copy of the GNU General Public License is available on the World Wide Web at
<http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>. You can also obtain it by writing to the
Free Software Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA. 