#summary Introducing TerseHandling: proscene-2 action-driven event handler supporting multiple DOFs devices.
#sidebar TerseHandlingSideBar

=Introduction to `TerseHandling`=

`TerseHandling` is a framework designed to _sketching_ generic input events, i.e., transforming software or hardware input events into high-level user-defined actions, mainly implemented using [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generics_in_Java generic programming] techniques. It provides its own set of events which supports up to [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degrees_of_freedom_(mechanics) 6-DOFs], together with a set of *agents* which parses them, i.e., identifies object *grabbers* and the *actions* they should perform, allowing the developer to focus on implementing those actions. A developer workflow using `TerseHandling` would typically involve the following tasks:

  * Choose among one of the provided `TerseHandling` *Agents* (extending it if necessary) and attach to it an event listening mechanism.
  * Reduce (hardware or software) input events into their `TerseHandling` counterparts.
  * Choose a callback mechanism: direct actionless approach (non-generic programming), or high-level action-driven (which extensively uses generic programming). In the latter case:
    * Define *shortcuts* over `TerseHandling` events to trigger different actions, using *Profiles*.
    * Implement the actions to be performed by object grabbers.

`TerseHandling` is a full-fledged, stand-alone library which will become the new event backend for the upcoming Procene-2 series, but can also backed up the event sub-system of any other third party *Java* or *Processing* library.

Here we introduce a series of `TerseHandling` tutorials, implemented as a well commented *Processing* sketches. It requires [https://processing.org/download/ Processing >= 2.x]. The library source code may be found [http://otrolado.info/remixcam.zip here], and its installation instructions [http://wiki.processing.org/w/How_to_Install_a_Contributed_Library#Manual_Install here]. The zip package includes the fully functional source code of the tutorials, found under the examples section of the library for you to study them. These tutorial series include: CallBack, GlobalActions, EventGrabberTupples, and [https://code.google.com/p/proscene/wiki/DOF6Agent DOF6Agent]. Please use the side bar to navigate among them. Your feedback is more than welcome to help us fine tune `TerseHandling` before its first release.